+++
title = "A look at the Economics of Single-Payer Healthcare"
description = "My personal thoughts and research done on what a single-payer healthcare system may look like in the United States"
date = 2021-05-16
[extra]
banner = "single-payer-economics.jpg"
+++

### Intro

When it comes to something such as universal healthcare there is often much debate on whether or not it would be a good idea. Personally I base my decision making on whether I support something on two things: empathy and economics. While empathy is relative to each person’s experiences, I think it's important to try and put yourself in the place of others. Take for example: my grandpa had a stroke (also unfortunately passed) years ago. His house was only 1 minute away from the hospital, yet want to guess how much the ambulance ride cost him? Tens of thousands of dollars, although he had insurance / medicare I imagine so he actually paid much less than that. But the point being, someone without insurance could have very easily ended up in lifelong debt due to something as common as needing an ambulance for a medical emergency. In fact, there are stories of people taking Ubers and Lyfts to a hospital rather than calling 911, which is quite saddening to me. All of us, regardless of your current socioeconomic class, are a few bad decisions away from not having something such as insurance that many take for granted.<br><br>

### Economics?

While people can debate all day whether healthcare is a right that should be provided by the government or not, I think the economics should also be factored into the decision of if and how we go about implementing universal health care. And while economics are still subjective to some degree, they are less so than empathy. Personally, I hear more of the downsides when it comes to economics in the media and news, meanwhile the upsides of helping others is told as a benefit. Somewhat surprisingly, the economics along with empathy might actually favor universal health care for most Americans. The most common economic complaint against universal healthcare is that it is “socialism.” Which to some degree, in terms of the redistribution of wealth, is correct. Everyone will pay taxes in different amounts based on income and everyone will receive universal health care regardless where they land in how much they paid in taxes. The underlying implication with calling this socialism is that capitalism is a better approach - which is what we currently have today.<br><br>

During my brief time doing intro level college economics, there was always the assumption that people are well informed and rational in their decision making. This was fundamental to the free market allocating resources in the most efficient manner. To me, I find it hard to imagine that people in medical emergencies are well informed and rational within the free market. Spending time researching and going to a competitor isn’t an option when you need medical attention that may save your life. Not to mention, even if you did have the time to research the competition, there isn’t all too much which leads to monopolistic companies not being incentivized to lower prices. This is where our current model falls flat. As well as the numerous hoops you have to jump through such as making sure you go to an in-network provider, the insurance having to pay their portion, you having to pay your portion, the ability to ask for discounted prices with the hospital if you can’t afford it, etc. Anyone will tell you dealing with the insurance middlemen leads to much wasted time, confusion and headache. It simply isn’t efficient for us, neither is it for the hospitals that must negotiate with insurance companies to be in network or the insurance companies who must negotiate prices with drug manufacturers.<br><br>

Now that leads us to the question, would single-payer be a more efficient way to handle health care than our current method? According to {% link(href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6961869/") %} this research article {% end %} published in the National Library of Medicine points to yes (note that it states that studies across the political spectrum all found single-payer healthcare to project overall savings).

> The article states that after doing cost analysis on 22 single-payer health care plans for the United States, 86% of plans resulted in projections that overall health costs in the United States would decrease mainly due to simplified billing and lower drug costs.

The complex middleman system of insurance would no longer be needed freeing up that money spent on the current administrative overhead. Additionally, the US government as a whole would be the one negotiating drug prices which would have much more leverage to reduce the price paid. While there are concerns around specialist wait times being longer and elective treatments, these pale in comparison to the broader issue and can be handled as well. Now it’s important to note, while the US government would be the single-payer. This does not mean they are also the single provider. I think the assumption of a single provider is where much of the skepticism comes from. The VA is often pointed to as an example of government provided health care which has many horror stories of awful treatment, mismanaged budgeting and under staffing so this is an understandable concern. Unlike the government also being the single provider in this case, single-payer universal healthcare would allow for private facilities to perform the treatment, with the difference being that the bill is sent to the government rather than insurance. This would still allow people to choose what doctors they want to see and be very much the free market. Furthermore, think of the amount of burden that would be lifted from small and medium size companies that must provide insurance for employees. It would greatly reduce their costs and help the free market in that way too.<br><br>

### Summary

All things considered, even under the current system of healthcare, no person is able to be denied medical treatment due to their lack of ability to pay. This means that in the situation that someone has no insurance and ends up with a huge sum of medical debt, that debt can sit unpaid then eventually be passed off to some other entity such as the hospital who provided the treatment, which then may need to up their treatment prices to the insurance companies to reflect unpaid debt, that is then passed off onto people who do have insurance. The best analogy that I can think of when it comes to explaining universal health care from both being a better society as well as being better economically is flu shots. Most people with insurance go and get their yearly flu shot which is totally free to them, the insurance company pays for the shot entirely. But do you ever wonder why? Well think about it, that flu shot is relatively cheap compared to the required treatment if you were to get the flu or even end up in the hospital with the flu. So the insurance company would rather pay for the cheap preventative treatment than not have you get the flu shot and pay more for the expensive hospital stay. Now extrapolating this out to universal healthcare, since people will receive medical treatment regardless of their ability to pay, wouldn't we as a society rather keep our people healthy by paying for everyone’s preventive treatment for not only the fact that its cheaper than having them hold off until then need to go to the extreme, such as an ER visit, but also because it's the right thing to do? If you ask me... yes.<br><br>
