+++
title = "2021 Learning Goals"
description = "Learning goals for 2021 that include learning Elixir, Phoenix (and LiveView) framework, continuing to learn styling/animation and more. "
date = 2021-06-01
[extra]
banner = "2021-learning-goals.jpg"
+++

### Setting Goals

As cliche as it sometimes sounds, I think setting goals are really helpful to stay productive and constantly learning. I personally have shifted much of my free time once spent playing video games over to learning new programming concepts and doing side projects. My current goals for the rest of 2021 and beyond is to continue learning more about ui design / animation and {% link(href="https://elixir-lang.org/") %} Elixir {% end %}. Working on this site has greatly improved my understanding of the {% link(href="https://jamstack.org/what-is-jamstack/") %} JamStack {% end %} (Javascript, APIs, and Markup) and static site generators. During the ui design I fell in love with using {% link(href="https://tailwindcss.com/") %} tailwindcss {% end %} as the styling library, which is used to style the blog portion of this website (I only had come to find tailwind part way into already starting the website). Tailwind is a perfect match with {% link(href="https://alpinejs.dev/") %} alpinejs {% end %} to add lightweight interactivity without needing a heavy javascript library. For the animation I am still currently trying to find what I like best. For this site I have been using {% link(href="https://alpinejs.dev/") %} animation.css {% end %} and {% link(href="https://michalsnik.github.io/aos/") %} animate on scroll {% end %}  that I have enjoyed for simple animations but I want to look more into coordinating advanced transitions which seems to require something like {% link(href="https://greensock.com/") %} GreenSock Animation Platform {% end %} (GSAP). My only issue with GSAP that is making me hold off is that I would prefer to have an MIT license in case I ever do find a way to earn money from it (GSAP license for using it in revenue earning apps is quite pricey, otherwise I would buy lifetime access). Currently I am looking into {% link(href="https://animejs.com/") %} anime.js {% end %} as an alternative to GSAP but we will see where I land on that front. <br><br>

Meanwhile, over the past 6 months I have been enjoying learning about functional programming (and somewhat annoyed that it was just glossed over in school). The language I learned the most of was F#, mainly due to the interopity with C# and .NET in general which I know from work. I fell in love with the pipe operators, async computation expressions and really just the overall syntax.  But the issue I ran into is that it simply isn’t that popular. There seemed to be mainly unmaintained libraries and the whole web stack setup was nice in that it emulated the Elm architecture but had way too many moving parts in my opinion. At least the tutorials I found were good... when I could find them. Specifically {% link(href="https://zaid-ajaj.github.io/the-elmish-book/#/") %} The Elmish Book by Zaid Ajaj  {% end %} and {% link(href="https://fsharpforfunandprofit.com/") %}F# For Fun and Profit {% end %} were awesome resources. The issue of lack of users still remained on more specific help though (note the slack channel was awesome but still wasn’t equivalent to having a vast array of youtube videos on anything and everything). The redeeming factor was that oftentimes I had to struggle on my own to make something that is somewhat similar work for my use case and taught me a lot about functional programming and being a better developer in general. After completing my internet programming class side project using the {% link(href="https://safe-stack.github.io/") %}SAFE stack {% end %}  I moved onto looking for a more popular functional language as I felt while fun, there really isnt a market for F#.<br><br>

While looking for a new functional language I briefly landed on {% link(href="https://www.haskell.org/") %}Haskell {% end %}  which was fun to learn about monads but still seemed like it was only used in highly niche situations in companies or academics. Then, not too long ago, I discovered Elixir. It seems to have a growing community and solves a very unique problem of making a system highly concurrent and distributed. At first I was unsure but after watching some of the talks on the language I was sold on the Phoenix framework and the overall open telecom platform from the Erlang runtime that it is built on. The major concern I have though is the lack of a static type system, it seems that that community has found ways to somewhat improve that using static analysis tools but it still seems that it cant compete with a proper type system. Which coming from F# and Haskell, I was spoiled as the compiler will work for you rather than against you. Interestingly enough, apparently facebook has a project to bring static typing to Erlang as the company WhatsApp that they own is built with Erlang so we will see if that ever comes to fruition. This leads into the next thing I noticed about Elixir, it seems to actually be used by many companies. It's great to see many small consulting companies posting jobs but what surprises me is that it is the foundation of many messaging systems such as Discord and also what the PepsiCo Ecommerce is built with.  Knowing that Elixir, while still a niche, is used at many big companies gives yet another reason to learn it!<br><br>

### My Learning Process

My process when it comes to learning new programming things is to usually research what it does better and why to use it. Mostly generic talks on it that are found on youtube and seeing what companies use it. Then I move on to watching video tutorials to get a general idea of the syntax and set up. This is where I am currently at with Elixir. I just finished {% link(href="https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLJbE2Yu2zumA-p21bEQB6nsYABAO-HtF2") %}this tutorial {% end %} which is a great starter tutorial on Elixir (for anyone interested {% link(href="https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLJbE2Yu2zumA-p21bEQB6nsYABAO-HtF2") %}here is the tutorial I watched on tailwind{% end %} that is made by one of the creators). Once I get some confidence then firmly believe the best way to learn is to find a side project to actually use whatever it is in practice. I am yet to have come up with an idea for my Elixir side project. I do know that I want it to involve Phoenix LiveView and sockets of some sort though. Then once doing the side project I have also been learning about deployment of software so I try to find the best way to deploy it so I can add it to my list of projects / resume.<br><br>

### Summary

Well, that is all I have on my list for things to learn for now, I will be sure to post as I go along!<br><br>
###### To Recap:<br>

I want to continue learning tailwind css and adding onto it by using animation libraries to create elegant user interfaces! Meanwhile, I am also beginning my look into learning Elixir which I hope to build a side project with!
