+++
title = "Investment Strategy 2021"
description = "A short overview of my take on investing in 2021"
date = 2021-05-26
[extra]
banner = "investing-2021.jpg"
+++
 
I want to start off with the good ol’ I am not a financial adviser so take this as entertainment rather than advice… With that out of the way, I wanted to briefly share my current investment philosophy. I think a lot of people get caught up in the r/wallstreetbets hype and either make a ton of money because they “like the stock” 🚀 or end up losing a bunch of money when the sell off comes📉. I think depending on how you look at it, keeping up with stocks is either entertainment or a mental drain. I fall into the latter myself. While I have invested in individual stocks and still do to some degree just for entertainment though it's glorified gambling in a sense, the overwhelming majority of my investments are actually in mutual funds. Originally, I had my money in VGT which is a Vanguard technology ETF. While I like the flexibility of mutual funds better and would have preferred to use VITAX, the 100k minimum investment is going to keep me out for quite a while. 🙃 BUT… I did notice that using Chase’s investment service they allow you access to all Vanguard (and Fidelity) mutual funds, with the added bonus that there is no minimum investment amount. So considering that, it is interesting to know that the barrier to entry isn’t there by using a third party platform yet is there when using Vanguard directly? Anyhow the ETF version will suffice for most people but I found it interesting as yet another small reason why the Chase investment platform is surprisingly nice.<br><br>

Back to the point, VGT was a technology ETF which had consistent growth and returns but I fell in the trap of constantly checking how the tech sector was doing and trying to predict what would happen next. Even though I was keeping up with the market, I didn’t really sell or really change my investment strategy at all. What makes it worse is that I work in tech as a software developer and have quite a large bias towards the tech sector being the future of practically everything. But after a while I realized that keeping up with the market was what I enjoyed doing, it was just mindless reading without any real outcomes. Why waste my mornings keeping up with stocks when I could be using that time to learn more about programming or anything more valuable whether it's productive or not.<br><br>

This is when I decided that I need to just hold a mutual fund that tracks the overall market… But then I realized my next bias. I went to look into relevant options, I was looking for funds that cover the whole US market and not any foreign stocks. Given that I was trying to prevent “choosing” a specific company or sector as a winner, why would that rule of diversification be any different than picking a single country to bet on? Of course, the United States has out performed much of the rest of the world in recent history. But I’m sure we all have heard the “Past performance is no guarantee of future results” rule when it comes to anything regarding the stock market. And while I live in the US and hope for its ongoing success, I don’t think the United States post ww2 boom and overall exceptionalism will last forever, especially as other countries become more developed and will likely eat into our market share. With this now in mind I went to find either a combination of funds to give me both US and international coverage or just a single fund if it was possible. This is when I found {% link(href="https://investor.vanguard.com/mutual-funds/profile/VTWAX") %} Vanguard’s VTWAX fund {% end %}  that was recently created in 2019 to provide a low cost way for investors to get exposure to the global markets. 

{{ figure(internalSrc="region-allocation.jpg" description="VTWAX Region Allocation" source="Vanguard" href="https://investor.vanguard.com/mutual-funds/profile/VTWAX") }}

This fund ended up meeting my needs perfectly and should allow me to catch any upswings of the US market or of the world as a whole, meanwhile providing enough diversification from individual company / country downturns! Additionally since I am young I would like to keep my investments in equities only and hold off for a while on getting any bonds so this fund works out nice by having 0% bond allocation. The expense ratio is 0.10% which is fair given the convenience of having a one fund solution that is easier to manage and doesn't require any manually rebalancing. Now that I use this fund exclusively outside of any playing around with other stocks for entertainment, I am looking forward to seeing how it goes!


